UC3 Inheritance (#216)
solid/authorization-panel: proposals/evaluation/uc-3-inheritance.md

Alice can read all resources in a collection.

### ACP

```turtle
ex:Collection1
  acp:accessControl ex:AccessControl1 ;
  ldp:contains ex:Resource1 .

ex:AccessControl1
  acp:applyMembers ex:Policy1 .

ex:Policy1
  acp:anyOf ex:AgentMatcher1 ;
  acp:allow acl:Read .

ex:AgentMatcher1
  acp:agent ex:Alice .
```

Note: Resources linked to a collection via `ldp:contains` will inherit policies linked to the collection's access control via `acp:applyMembers`. Collections linked to a collection via `ldp:contains` will pass the inherited policies through to their member resources.

## Read access to a group on a collection of resources

See also: https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#inheritance-readonly

### Setup

The Weekly status collection is an `ldp:BasicContainer`, which contains a number of `ldp:BasicContainers`, one for each weekly meeting. The advantage of having these as containers rather than plain resources is that any number of other documents can be added to the container too.

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/>
<.>
  a ldp:BasicContainer ;
  ldp:contains <2021-04-28/>, <2021-05-05/>, <2021-05-12/> .
```

> The `</weekly-status/.acl>` resource is advertised as `</weekly-status/>`'s access control list via a `Link` header with a relationship type of `http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#accessControl`.

Reviewer: Redundancy; line 68 repeats line 52. One should be deleted.
```suggestion
```

Author: Commited the other one.

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```
</weekly-status/>
</weekly-status/.acl>
</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>
</weekly-status/2021-05-05/>
</weekly-status/2021-05-12/>
```

We want to enable read access to all resources contained in `</weekly-status/>` for a group of people (`ex:Alice` & `ex:Bob`).

### ACP

The `</weekly-status/.acl>` resource is advertised as `</weekly-status/>`'s access control list via a `Link` header with a relationship type of `http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#accessControl`.

Bob and Alice are part of the agent matcher `</acp/matcher/research#g1>`:

```turtle

> # Resource: </acp/matcher/research#g1>

Author: ```suggestion
# Resource: </acp/matcher/research>
```

<#g1>
  a acp:AgentMatcher ;
  acp:agent ex:Bob, ex:Alice .
```

The research policy #1 gives read access to all agents in `</acp/matcher/research#g1>`:

```turtle

> # Resource: </acp/policy/research#p1>

Author: ```suggestion
# Resource: </acp/policy/research>
```

  acp:allow acl:Read .
```

The access control `</weekly-status/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/>` and via policy `</acp/research#p1>` enables read access for all agents matched by `</acp/research#m1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1> ; # applies the policy to the container resource </weekly-status/>
  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/>
```

Todo:  what is the ACR for 
`</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>` and what information is in it?
   
### WAC

Bob and Alice are members of the research group `</groups/research#g1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </groups/research>
<#g1>
  a vcard:Group ;
  vcard:hasMember ex:Bob ;
  vcard:hasMember ex:Alice .
```

The acl enabling read access to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/>` for all members of group `</groups/research#g1>` is:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .
```

## 2. Changing permissions to a subcollection

> Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`.

Author: What about:

Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the "2021-04-28" weekly status, that is, the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` and every resource it contains.

> Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`.

Author: ```suggestion
Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the "2021-04-28" weekly status, that is, the collection </weekly-status/2021-04-28/> and every resource it contains.
```

> Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`.

Reviewer 2: Better. That's two sets of rules though ie. 1) `/weekly-status/2021-04-28/` and 2) all members of `/weekly-status/2021-04-28/` Is that what's intended? 3) unclear if all descendants are intended to be covered as well.

> Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`.

Author: Applied @TallTed's suggestion.

(What example from the UCR does this correspond to best?)

### ACP 

Carol is part of the agent matcher `</acp/research#m2>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#m2>
  a acp:AgentMatcher ;
  acp:agent ex:Carol .
```

The research policy `</acp/research#p2>` gives read access to all agents matched by `</acp/research#m2>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#p2>
  a acp:Policy ;
  acp:anyOf <#m2> ;
  acp:allow acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

The access control `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` and via policy `</acp/research#p2>` enables read access for all agents matched by `</acp/research#m2>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1>, </acp/research#p2> ;
  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1>, </acp/research#p2> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/2021-04-28/>
```

### WAC

> To change the access rules to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection Bob must edit `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. But doing so will disable the default access control rule located in `</weekly-status/.acl>` . So the content of the PUT must contain the default rule and the new ones.

Author: ```suggestion
In order to give Carol read and write access to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection and its content, Bob must create a new effective ACL resource: `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. That ACL resource must express all permissions applying to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`, which means in order to maintain the access permissions previously defined in `</weekly-status/.acl>` . Bob will also add an authorization defining read access for the research group there.
```

> To change the access rules to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection Bob must edit `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. But doing so will disable the default access control rule located in `</weekly-status/.acl>` . So the content of the PUT must contain the default rule and the new ones.

Author: Applied @TallTed's suggestion.

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .

<#new-authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;

>   acl:default <.> ;

Author: I think what is meant by the "only" part of the statement is not to all weekly status reports. I'll rephrase the main statement to reflect this.

  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

We could also use WAC's effective access control resource discovery mechanism and augment the content of `</weekly-status/.acl>`.

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .

<#new-authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;
  acl:default <./2021-04-28/> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .

> ```

Reviewer 2: When `/weekly-status/.acl` is associated with `/weekly-status/` , `acl:default <./2021-04-28/>` will not be used towards evaluation (as per current WAC ED). This possibility was raised but needs to be vetted/implemented.

Author: I see [Tim's answer on issue 55](https://github.com/solid/specification/issues/55#issuecomment-536092174) clearly stating that `acl:Authorization` statements pointing via `acl:default` to a different object node from the URL of the resource for which the current ACL is defined should be ignored.

But I can't find the counterpart in the current WAC ED.
I checked [#authorization-conformance](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#authorization-conformance), [#authorization-evaluation](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#authorization-evaluation) & [#authorization-matching](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#authorization-matching).

Do you know where I could find this?
Is this specific point worth raising as an issue on https://github.com/solid/web-access-control-spec?

Reviewer 2: The definition in http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#default dictates.

acl:default can only be a container. Perhaps https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#acl-default can be improved.

Earlier text used this https://github.com/solid/web-access-control-spec/pull/83/commits/173654fd4318078d2bcfac4ee95c2450aa17d18f#diff-0eb547304658805aad788d320f10bf1f292797b5e6d745a3bf617584da017051L572 and it was slightly changed to express your concerns.. but (my) intention was to always keep it with the container that's in context (re determining effective ACL resource). If you feel that can be clarified, happy to update the text.

https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/191 is one issue that proposes to relax default.

Author: From the ontology:

> If a resource has no ACL file (it is 404), then access to the resource if given by the ACL of the immediately containing directory, or failing that (404) the ACL of the recursively next containing directory which has an ACL file. Within that ACL file, any Authentication which has that directory as its acl:default applies to the resource. (The highest directory must have an ACL file.)

It is a little confusing, but I get how that mandates not applying authorizations targetting subdirectories.

I think the current definition as it stands [in the WAC ED](https://solid.github.io/web-access-control-spec/#acl-default) is really good as is. But I don't see how it conveys this restriction. I think ultimately, I would agree with relaxing `acl:default` & `acl:accessTo` as described in https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/191.

I will add a note about all this rather than completely removing that section.

  acp:allow acl:Read .
```

The access control `</weekly-status/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/>` and via policy `</acp/research#p1>` enables read access for all agents matched by `</acp/research#m1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1> ; # applies the policy to the container resource </weekly-status/>
  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/>
```

Todo:  what is the ACR for 
`</weekly-status/2021-04-28/report.md>` and what information is in it?
   
### WAC

Bob and Alice are members of the research group `</groups/research#g1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </groups/research>
<#g1>
  a vcard:Group ;
  vcard:hasMember ex:Bob ;
  vcard:hasMember ex:Alice .
```

The acl enabling read access to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/>` for all members of group `</groups/research#g1>` is:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .
```

## 2. Changing permissions to a subcollection

> Bob wants to give Carol read/write access but only to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`.

Reviewer: Further tweak to @matthieubosquet's text suggestion just above.  Note -- the backticks around the angle-brackets (`< >`) in the text are necessary!
```suggestion
Bob wants to give Carol read/write access to the "2021-04-28" weekly status, and nothing more; that is, to the collection `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` and every resource it contains, but not to any other resource in the collection `</weekly-status/>`.
```

(What example from the UCR does this correspond to best?)

### ACP 

Carol is part of the agent matcher `</acp/research#m2>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#m2>
  a acp:AgentMatcher ;
  acp:agent ex:Carol .
```

The research policy `</acp/research#p2>` gives read access to all agents matched by `</acp/research#m2>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#p2>
  a acp:Policy ;
  acp:anyOf <#m2> ;
  acp:allow acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

> The access control `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` and via policy `</acp/research#p2>` enables read access for all agents matched by `</acp/research#m2>`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The access control `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` and, via policy `</acp/research#p2>`, enables read access for all agents matched by `</acp/research#m2>`:
```

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1>, </acp/research#p2> ;
  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1>, </acp/research#p2> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/2021-04-28/>
```

### WAC

> To change the access rules to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection Bob must edit `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. But doing so will disable the default access control rule located in `</weekly-status/.acl>` . So the content of the PUT must contain the default rule and the new ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give Carol read and write access to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection and its content, Bob must create a new effective ACL resource, `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`, which must express all permissions that are to govern access to `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>`. In other words, to maintain the access permissions previously defined in `</weekly-status/.acl>`, Bob will need to include an authorization defining read access for the research group, along with an authorization defining read and write access for Carol, in the new `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`.
```

However, if WAC's use of `acl:default` were to be relaxed as described in [issue 191](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/191), then one could rely on the effective access control resource discovery mechanism and augment the content of `</weekly-status/.acl>`:

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .

<#new-authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;
  acl:default <./2021-04-28/> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

See also: https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/pull/216#discussion_r665230245

### WAC+ ac:imports

[WAC+:imports](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210) works just as WAC does above with `:default` working as shown. The advantage of `ac:imports` is that the resource  `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.ac>` need only be set to contain:

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.ac>
<>
  ac:imports <../.acl> .

<#new-authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

> The advantage of this is that it removes the needed duplication of the `</weekly-status/.acl#authorization>` rule, so that if that needs to be edited it can be done so in one place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, this removes the need to duplicate the `</weekly-status/.acl#authorization>` rule, so any future edits to that rule need only be done in one place.
```

We want to enable read access to all resources contained in `</weekly-status/>` for a group of people (`ex:Alice` & `ex:Bob`).

### ACP

Bob and Alice are part of the agent matcher `</acp/research#m1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#m1>
  a acp:AgentMatcher ;
  acp:agent ex:Bob, ex:Alice .
```

The research policy `</acp/research#p1>` gives read access to all agents matched by `</acp/research#m1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </acp/research>
<#p1>
  a acp:Policy ;
  acp:anyOf <#m1> ;
  acp:allow acl:Read .
```

The access control `</weekly-status/.acp#ac1>` applies to all resources contained in `</weekly-status/>` and enables read access to all agents matched by `</acp/research#m1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acp>
<#ac1>
  a acp:AccessControl ;
  acp:apply </acp/research#p1> ; # applies the policy to the container resource </weekly-status/>
  acp:applyMembers </acp/research#p1> . # applies the policy to all resources contained by </weekly-status/>
```

An unauthenticated client making a GET on `</weekly-status/>` container will receive a `Link: <.acp>; rel="acl"` header in the `401` response that points to the above `<.acp>`. 

> This relation is what makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acp>` authoritative, and is therefore the information the client can use to decide what credentials to present.

Author: My goal was to focus on exactly what is required, but I guess it makes sense to include some implicit requirements and use the functional requirements for describing atoms of functionality.

> This relation is what makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acp>` authoritative, and is therefore the information the client can use to decide what credentials to present.

Reviewer 3: I don't see why public read would be needed for this UC. I only suggest that if for some reason it would be needed, the policies should have access set accordingly. IMO we should just remove this sentences unless they are really relevant for this use case.

> This relation is what makes the contents of `</weekly-status/.acp>` authoritative, and is therefore the information the client can use to decide what credentials to present.

Author: @elf-pavlik I tried pencilling in some statements about access to the `</weekly-status/.acp>` resource and it makes everything more complex and confusing in my opinion.

A few clarifications:
1. This Use Case is not about controlling access to the access control resource.
2. The Access Control Resource would not be readable by anyone except for the owner if it has no relevant access control statements.
3. Your first comment applies to the WAC example too, where we're not portraying who has `acl:Control` access either.

Now, I hear you that effective Access Control Resource discovery is beyond this Use Case.

My plan is to merge the UCs as is. I actually have a draft UC0 "Effective access control resource discovery" that I want to submit specifically to address this problem. I'd like to extract this bit of the text and its relevant parts in a different PR.

| vcard   | http://www.w3.org/2006/vcard/ns#  |

## Read access on a collection of resources

See also: https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#inheritance-readonly

Alice can read all resources in a collection.

### ACP

```turtle
ex:Collection1
  acp:accessControl ex:AccessControl1 ;
  ldp:contains ex:Resource1 .

ex:AccessControl1
  acp:applyMembers ex:Policy1 .

ex:Policy1
  acp:anyOf ex:AgentMatcher1 ;
  acp:allow acl:Read .

ex:AgentMatcher1
  acp:agent ex:Alice .
```

Note: Resources linked to a collection via `ldp:contains` will inherit policies linked to the collection's access control via `acp:applyMembers`. Collections linked to a collection via `ldp:contains` will pass the inherited policies through to their member resources.

### WAC

The Weekly status collection is an `ldp:BasicContainer`, which contains a number of `ldp:BasicContainers`, one for each weekly meeting. The advantage of having these as containers rather than plain resources is that any number of other documents can be added to the container too.

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/>
<.>
  a ldp:BasicContainer ;
  ldp:contains <2021-04-28/>, <2021-05-05/>, <2021-05-12/> .
```

> The `</weekly-status/.acl>` resource is advertised as `</weekly-status/>`'s access control list via a `Link` header with a relationship type of `http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#accessControl`.

Reviewer 2: Tentative information (until the WAC ED/WD goes through): `rel="acl"` (very likely), `rel="https://www.w3.org/ns/iana/link-relations/relation"`(possible in addition to former, or inferred), `rel="http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#accessControl"` (less likely).

Author: I have a question about that specifically. In order to be consistent on the protocol level, could we have a standard relationship type linking resources to their access control resource?

What I mean is:
1. Using the same relationship type no matter what the authorization system is on the other side
2. Advertising itself as its own Access control resource when relevant (an acl mandates control over itself)

Then the resource type could be also consistently advertised by servers (something like rel="type", http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#AccessControlList).

Reviewer 2: 1. Yes, that'd be ideal. Any reason why we can't use either one of the three I listed above? At least the way the `acl` link relation in the Protocol is A acl B with no constraints on A or B. And, the link-relation URI can be inferred or used in place.

2. https://github.com/solid/specification/issues/191

Reviewer 3: While solid spec could add requirement that either link relation is valid `acl` or `https://www.w3.org/ns/iana/link-relations/relation#acl`. In plain HTTP they are two different link relations. I still don't understand why we can't just use an IRI as link relation and don't introduce this anomaly of requiring to treat two different link relations as equivalent.

Author: Having a standard registered link relation name for access control resources makes sense to me and hence supporting both `acl` and `https://www.w3.org/ns/iana/link-relations/relation#acl` on the client sounds good.

I think the alternative would be to not use a registered link relation name and go with a property defined in the most relevant ontology.

As far as I understand, it is likely that we would succeed in [getting a standard relation name registered](https://github.com/protocol-registries/link-relations) (for example `acl`).

> Any reason why we can't use either one of the three I listed above?

We could maybe consider registering a standard IANA link relation:

| Relation name    | Description                                                                                    | Reference         |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------- |
| access-control  | Refers to a resource mandating access over the link's context. | Solid Protocol   |

Reasons for spelling out "access control" instead of using "acl" could include:
- The specificity seems more adequate, that is, a resource that is not strictly speaking an `acl` could mandate control over the current context
- The currently registered standard relationships are not acronyms and it seems to me that the clear and explicit spelling "access-control" for a link relation would have positive effects on adoption (potentially beyond Solid and generally for access control discovery)
- It would eliminate the conflation of (or clarify the difference between) access control discovery and access control system

Reviewer 4: I agree that we may want something that is less tied to "Access Control Lists". Those are very good starting points for access control, but we are already going beyond ACLs, and a lot of people may come to the wrong conclusion that the system we are building is limited to lists. 
But perhaps that should be discussed in its own issue, as it will get lost otherwise.

Reviewer 3: Currently `acl` is *not* one of link relations registered with IANA https://www.iana.org/assignments/link-relations/link-relations.xhtml

I think we should just use an IRI and don't try to register anything with IANA.

Reviewer 3: Could you explain benefit of registering a string vs using full IRI? We know that we do want possibility of using IRI to make statements in RDF. There is no official mapping of link relation to IRIs and we would need to define one for the link relation we consider registering. In that case I really can't see benefit of registering that would justify introducing two different link relations that should be considered as equivalent. If implementation MUST support the IRI link relation anyways, adding second alternative as short string registered with IANA only puts extra requirement (IMO pure burden) since full IRI link already MUST be supported.

Author: @bblfish @elf-pavlik , as per Henry's suggestion, let's follow up on this discussion there: https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/228

Elf, would it be be ok to start the debate with the question can we have 1 standard link relation for all access control systems?

But to your question, I think the registration of a new name with IANA for such a wide concept as access control discovery sounds like a good idea. If anything, I don't think it is important that Solid clients would understand the corresponding IRI as a Link relation name. On the other hand, for brevity, clarity and potential adoption, Solid servers using a Link rel="access-control" sounds good to me. And we can always use the IRI https://www.w3.org/ns/iana/link-relations/relation#access-control to express this relation in a resource representation (those statements that I consider part of the data-driven runtime of Solid servers).

However, I appreciate that those arguments are to some extent subjective.

That's why I would suggest starting with the other concerns.

We have the following hierarchy of resources:

```
</weekly-status/>
</weekly-status/.acl>
</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>
</weekly-status/2021-05-05/>
</weekly-status/2021-05-12/>
```

Bob and Alice are members of the research group `</groups/research#g1>`:

```turtle
# Resource: </groups/research>
<#g1>
    a                vcard:Group ;
    vcard:hasMember  ex:Bob ;
    vcard:hasMember  ex:Alice .
```

The acl enabling read access to all resources contained by `</weekly-status/>` for all members of group `</groups/research#g1>` is:

```turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>

> []

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<#authorization>
  a acl:Authorization ;
```

Author: Would a blank node be illegal?

Reviewer 2: It is valid but not globally referenceable.

Author: OK, makes sense.

Reviewer 4: The thing is that ACLs in WAC cannot currently be re-used. 
So naming them is not that helpful.

  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;

>   acl:default <.> ;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  acl:default <./> ;
```

  acl:mode acl:Read .
```

> Note: A resource will use its parent container's access control `acl:default` authorization unless it has its own access control defined (parentage being defined via the `ldp:contains` predicate). Inheritance is not granular and can be cut off by adding an access control to a resource at any point in the resource hierarchy tree. If the parent container doesn't have an access control, the WAC inheritance algorithm works its way up through `ldp:contains` predicates.

Author: @csarven can you confirm that the WAC example above is correct?

Reviewer 2: Incorrect. WAC doesn't depend on LDP. Not sure why the Note is necessary here/in this document either. It is also framed a bit awkward or confusing eg. the sentence "Inheritance is not granular [..]". Another way of expressing it is that authorization is inherited from the most applicable container's ACL resource.

Author: I'll try to rephrase the statement about inheritance, it is confusing indeed.

However, from the WAC spec, in "ACL Inheritance Algorithm" I read:

> Otherwise, look for authorizations to inherit from the ACL of the document's container.
> ...

Isn't a document's container determined via `ldp:contains`? What are other ways to determine the most applicable container?

This is meant to be a UCR based detailed comparison of how WAC and ACP work.

Reviewer 2: WAC talks about the notion of "container", it doesn't say anything about LDP or `ldp:contains`. Why would WAC/ACL be coupled with LDP *especially* if they predate LDP? When WAC is used alongside a system that uses `ldp:contains`, containment relationships are understood/applied/derived in that context. Just as we can understand containment as per Solid Protocol's slash semantics (RFC 3986), ActivityStreams Collections (`as:items`), or anything for that matter.

There is no spoon.

> The downside of this is that adding an access control resource, requires all the relevant rules to be copied to the new acr, creating duplication of rules.

Reviewer 2: Adding an "access control resource" to what? Why is it framed in terms of copying/duplicating rules as opposed to providing specific authorization policies for a given resource.

Author: We're just trying to compare features or characteristics of WAC and ACP.

Providing specific authorization policies is something both can do, policy reuse seems to be, to my understanding, something WAC currently doesn't allow.

Reviewer 4: I think we need to extend the example with an action where the ACL of one of the weekly meetings is edited with a `PUT`. 
Say we want to add another person who can read those weekly meeting notes. (Can we find that explicitly referenced in the use cases, so that we can build on the use cases?
We will find then that WAC requires the old inherited rules to be added to the PUT.

Reviewer 2: inheritance-readonly could've been written in a couple of sentences. Not sure why Requirement 3.4.1 is listing all the things that's excluded, as opposed to only saying what's required.

Can you point to the requirements of UC3 where "policy reuse" is anything above and beyond applying applicable rules from somewhere? Why is "policy reuse" or rather copying/duplication being "systematically" evaluated here?

Reviewer 4: Re. "Policy reuse" is just a specific instance of [DRY: Don't Repeat Yourself](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself), software engineering principle.  It is a noticeable difference between current WAC/ACL and [WAC+imports](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210#issuecomment-838747077), which I want to add to the list here too.

Reviewer 2: The underlying issue with the use case is that it is solutions engineered as per "inheritance". If it had been centred on "policy reuse", then there'd more potential solutions, and the "inherited", "imports", "copying/duplicating" etc can be among those. Then one can come up with an actual/useful evaluation. For instance, comparing the type of inheritance mechanism approach taken by different solutions, or comparing how one uses inheritance, the other uses dynamic importing.. performance, maintainability etc. None of this is apparent in this "systematic" evaluation. Not sure what the end goal is to other than saying WAC has downsides and ACP has none? Alright.. go for it.

Reviewer 4: @csarven 
> Not sure what the end goal is to other than saying WAC has downsides and ACP has none? Alright.. go for it.

I don't find that type of comment very helpful, and it is quite clearly wrong: We are just starting a process of comparing different ways of doing things. I for one am not prejudging any answer to these problems. There are always pros and cons to everything. As it happens, I am advocating for a minimal extension to WAC, which I believe could also be adopted by ACP.  The exercise here is to pinpoint how this can work, what the advantages are, etc... 

As I mentioned I will add a section for WAC+`:imports` to the document.
I have just implemented all the infrastructure for that in [commits to Reactive-Solid since May 20](https://github.com/co-operating-systems/Reactive-SoLiD/commits/master) and hope to get the access control based on that implemented over the weekend.

Reviewer 2: Pardon me.. it is just the age old baggage on "WAC limitations" appearing in different forms. So, what are the "downsides" of ACP here? Missing data or there are none?

Reviewer 4: I need to study the RDF @matthieubosquet put forward. But I think in teleconference he was saying that ACP also had the data duplication problem:  (without `:imports`) it seems like a lot of triples need to be copied over. That is at least how @kjetilk interpreted the specs in [issue 206 on efficiency](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/206). But I'll leave @matthieubosquet to reply. If that is a problem, it would be good to make it clear.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps I've misinterpreted this "downsides" only for WAC since it came right after WAC's Note. Perhaps need to have another section with a different heading covering this information for all solutions.

Reviewer 4: I wrote the downsides for WAC because I am pretty sure I understand WAC, but not so sure about ACP.  
Also the ACP section had not been formatted consistently so that it would match WAC section RDF layout. This is still work in progress. 

But yes, I think it would be good to have pros and cons for each, hopefully structured in the same way, so that the differences and similarities become clear.

# Access Inheritance Use Cases

Within this document, the following namespace prefix bindings are used:

| Prefix  | Namespace                         |
| ------- | --------------------------------- |
| acl     | http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#    |
| acp     | http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#   |
| ex      | https://example.com/              |
| ldp     | http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#         |
| vcard   | http://www.w3.org/2006/vcard/ns#  |

## Read access on a collection of resources

See also: https://solid.github.io/authorization-panel/authorization-ucr/#inheritance-readonly

Alice can read all resources in a collection.

### ACP

```turtle
ex:Collection1
  acp:accessControl ex:AccessControl1 ;

>   ldp:contains ex:Resource1 .

Reviewer 4: @matthieubosquet is it possible to use the same directory layout for your ACP example as for the WAC example I gave below, to make it easier to compare both?

Author: I just pushed that

| Prefix    | Namespace                           |
| --------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `acl`     | `http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/acl#`    |
| `ac`      |  WAC+ namespace, undetermined       |
| `acp`     | `http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/acp#`   |
| `ex`      | `https://example.com/`              |
| `ldp`     | `http://www.w3.org/ns/ldp#`         |

> | `vcard`   | `http://www.w3.org/2006/vcard/ns#` 
>  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `vcard`   | `http://www.w3.org/2006/vcard/ns#`  |
```

# Resource: </weekly-status/.acl>
[]
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;

>   acl:default <./> ;

Reviewer 4: That comes to the same. I am not sure it is that much clearer. The dot in unix means `this directory` and
this is what it means here too (with `directory` replaced with `container` of course)

I tested that with cwm and [Easy RDF](https://www.easyrdf.org/converter)
```
@base <http://localhost/acl> .
@prefix acl: <https://ex.com/> .
[]
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .
```

Author: Ah cool, I prefer the `<.>` syntax personally, so if it's the same, I'd say let's revert.

### ACP 

todo

### WAC

To change the access rules to the `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/>` collection Bob must edit `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>`. But doing so will disable the default access control rule located in `</weekly-status/.acl>` . So the content of the PUT must contain the default rule and the new ones.

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.acl>
<#authz>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agentGroup </groups/research#g1> ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read .

<#authzNew>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

### WAC+ac:imports

[WAC+:imports](https://github.com/solid/authorization-panel/issues/210) works just as WAC does above with `:default` working as shown. The advantage of `ac:imports` is that the resource  `</weekly-status/2021-04-28/.ac>` need only be set to contain:

```Turtle
# Resource: </weekly-status/2021-04-28/.ac>
<> ac:imports <../.acl> .

<#authzNew>
  a acl:Authorization ;
  acl:agent ex:Carol ;
  acl:default <.> ;
  acl:mode acl:Read, acl:Write .
```

> The advantage of this is that it removes the needed duplication of the `</weekly-status/.acl#authorization>` rule, so that if that needs to be edited it can be done so in one place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One advantage of this setup is that it removes the need to duplicate the `</weekly-status/.acl#authorization>`, which means that if that setting needs to be changed, the edit only need be done in one place.
```
